From: will at ccs.neu.edu (William D Clinger)
Date: Thu, 14 Jun 2007 20:20:53 -0400
Subject: [Formal] syntactic sugar causes cancer of the exports
Message-ID: <E1HyzYb-0003qY-Tc@adara.ccs.neu.edu>

Submitter: William D Clinger
Email address: will at ccs.neu.edu
Issue type: Defect
Priority: Major
Component: Other (baleful influence of macros)
Report version: 5.94
Summary: syntactic sugar causes cancer of the exports

Full description of issue:

In response to previous formal comments, the 5.94
draft is careful to note that:

    the (rnrs base (6)) library exports identifiers
    unquote unquote-splicing => else ... _ set!

    the (rnrs records syntactic (6)) libraries exports
    fields mutable immutable parent protocol sealed
    opaque nongenerative

The editors intended to set a precedent by exporting
macro keywords in this way.  They failed to follow
that precedent, however, in three other libraries:

    (rnrs bytevector (6)) apparently does not export
    big little

    (rnrs i/o ports (6)) apparently does not export
    no-create no-fail no-truncate
    lf cr crlf nel crnel ls
    ignore raise replace

    (rnrs syntax-case (6)) apparently does not export
    ... _ set!

If these omissions were deliberate, they break the
precedent set by the (rnrs base (6)) and (rnrs records
syntactic (6)) libraries, which is a problem in itself.

If these omissions are corrected, they bring to light
a more fundamental problem with the intended precedent:
syntactic sugar makes it necessary for a library to
export the keywords its macros match (or else to treat
them specially as symbols, which is inconsistent with
the precedent set by R5RS and with the two libraries
cited above).  It is easy for implementors of a library
to overlook the need for these exports.

Worse, it is easy for a client of a library to overlook
these exports.

Worse still, clients may not be able to determine the
exported identifiers by examining the source code of
the libraries they import.  For example, it is likely
that some implementations of the R6RS will not make
their (rnrs bytevector (6)) and (rnrs i/o ports (6))
libraries available in source form, or will write
those libraries in a language other than R6RS Scheme.
That will make it impossible for clients to determine
the implementation-dependent identifiers that are
exported by those libraries.

(Recall that the endianness, file-options, eol-style,
and error-handling-mode syntaxes are explicitly
allowed to recognize implementation-dependent identifiers,
which will presumably be exported by those libraries.)

Clients' inability to determine which identifiers are
exported by standard libraries implies that, in theory,
it is impossible to write fully portable code that
imports those libraries.

Fortunately, there is an easy solution to this problem.
The problematic syntaxes (endianness, file-options,
eol-style, and error-handling-mode) are all unnecessary.
Their only purpose is to detect a certain kind of bug
at macro-expansion time instead of run time, and to
prevent the buggy program's execution from commencing.

Since the 5.94 draft forbids implementations to deal
with similar errors by refusing to execute the program,
the provision of these four syntaxes is inconsistent,
arbitrary, and capricious.  The file-options syntax
should be replaced by a procedure, and the other three
syntaxes can and should be omitted from the R6RS.

The problem these four syntaxes cause is more severe
than the problem they solve.  They should be removed
from the report, and Scheme programmers in general
should remember that syntactic sugar causes cancer
of the exports.

Will


From r6rs at jdev.users.panix.com  Fri Jun 15 14:21:23 2007
