R7RS suggestions:

Missing type predicates:

  enum-set?
  environment?
  record-constructor-descriptor?

Missing equality predicates:

  enum-type=?
  record-type-descriptor=?

  The latter should be referenced in the description of eqv?

Extensions:

  standard-input-port, standard-output-port, and standard-error-port
  should take optional buffer-mode and maybe-transcoder arguments.
  the latter is just a convenience, but there's no existing way to
  specify a buffer mode for these ports.

Mutable-string issue:

  The get-string-n! procedure of the (rnrs io ports) library allows
  string-set! and string-fill! of the (rnrs mutable-strings) library
  to be implemented, which eliminates most of the benefit of isolating
  string-set! and string-fill! in the (rnrs mutable-strings) library
  and leaving them out of the composite (rnrs) library.

RTD equivalence issue

  Since the record names of two calls to make-record-type-descriptor with
  the same uid need not be the same, the spec should be loosened to allow
  the field names to be different as well, since both kinds of names are
  only informational.

&i/o-encoding and &i/o-decoding

  These condition types should not be subtypes of &i/o-port, since it's
  possible (e.g., with bytevector->string and string->bytevector) that
  no port is involved.

&undefined

  &undefined should either be a subtype of &syntax or the report should
  clarify that both a &syntax and an &undefined condition should be
  included when an exception is raised due to an unbound variable.

define-enumeration
  The <constructor syntax> should be optional.

utf8->string
  This procedure should take an optional argument to say whether a leading
  BOM should be ignored or treated as an ordinary character, with the
  default being to ignore a leading BOM for consistency with the
  utf16->string and utf32->string.

for-all, exists, memp, assp, and find implementation responsibilities
  The implementation responsibility description for for-all and exists
  say that the implemntation should not check that the input lists are
  well formed if the answer can be determined without doing so.  (The
  actual wording is not this clear, but this was the intent.) So, for
  example, (exists even? '(1 2 .  3)) should return #t.  This gets weird
  for cyclic input lists.  First, should (exists even? '#1=(1 .  #1#))
  [using the common but nonstandard syntax for cyclic lists] return #f
  because no element in the cyclic list is even, or should it raise an
  exception because the list is cyclic?  Should
  (exists equal? '#1=(1 . #1#) '(3 2 1)) return #t or raise an exception?
  Should the implementation be permitted to call the argument procedure
  more than once on some elements, as would happen if it uses the
  hare-and-tortoise algorithm for detecting cycles, or must it use some
  more expensive cycle-detection algorithm to avoid calling the argument
  procedure more than once on the inputs?  To resolve these issues, it
  might be appropriate to either require that the implementation check the
  lists arguments up front or at least to say that the implementation
  "may" check the arguments up front, i.e., have the report take no stand
  on what a proper implementation should do in these cases.

memp, assp, find implementation responsibilities
  These have the same issues for cyclic lists as for-all and exists,
  but without the added complication of multiple input lists.

Custom port issues:

  There's no way to set the position properly for a write after a
  lookahead on a custom binary input/output port unless working
  get-position and set-position! procedures are provided when the port
  is created.  The problem is worse for custom textual input and
  custom textual input/output ports.

  For example, suppose a program creates a custom binary input/output port,
  iop.  If the program evaluates first (get-u8 iop) then (put-u8 iop 77),
  the second byte of the file should be overwritten with the value 77.  As
  long as get-u8 actually read just one byte and didn't buffer any more,
  there's no problem.  In terms of the custom port's low-level opertions,
  this translates into a read! of one byte followed by a write! of one
  byte.  The read! advances the position from 0 to 1 and the write! writes
  to position 1.

  Now consider the alternate senario where the program evaluates first
  (lookahead-u8 iop) then (put-u8 iop 77).  In this senario, since lookahead
  doesn't advance the position, the first byte (rather than the second) of
  the file should be overwritten with 77.  But in terms of the custom port's
  low-level operations, this still translates into a read! of one byte
  followed by a write! of one byte.  write! won't know to put the byte
  at position 0 instead of position 1, because it doesn't know that the byte
  wasn't actually consumed.

  If get-position and set-position! are provided, put-u8 can determine the
  correct position for the write by calling get-position and subtracting the
  number of buffered bytes, then set the position using set-position!
  before calling write!.  In general, it can handle arbitrary amounts of
  input buffering in this manner.

  For custom textual input/output ports, the problem is worse because
  put-u8 can't determine the proper position even if get-position is
  supplied.  It has no way of subracting the number of characters it has
  buffered from the position since the position is not necessarily an
  integer representing the absolute character position in the underlying
  source.

  For custom textual input ports that provide a get-position procedure, the
  same problem prevents port-position from returning a useful value, since
  again there's no way to subtract the number of buffered characters to
  determine the actual position.

  It's also unclear whether an eof object occupies a character position,
  which affects the position calculation.  The report appears to suggest
  that eof objects are discrete elements of the input stream, but problems
  arise if eof does occupy character positions for finite streams ending
  in an infinite sequence of eof objects, including custom ports
  ultimately based on finite files.

  A possible set of fixes for would be (1) to add an "unconsumed-elements"
  argument to a custom port's get-position procedure that it can use to
  report an accurate position, (2) to require working get-position and
  set-position!  procedures for custom input/output ports, and (3) to
  declare that eof objects take up no byte or character positions.
