Ticket #92 (defect)

Phase semantics
Status: new	Reported by:	Andre van Tonder	Assigned to:	mflatt
Priority:	minor	Milestone:	r6rs
Component:	libraries	Version:	5.91
Keywords:		Cc:	

Summary: 

Slight refinement in specification of phase semantics for better
portability.

Description: 

At the beginning of section 6.2, the sentence

"An exception may be raised, however, if a binding is used out of its
declared phase(s)"

should preferably be changed to

"An exception [must] be raised, however, if a binding is used out of
its declared phase(s)"

As far as I am aware, all three existing reference implementations do
this, so it should be no problem. Leaving it unspecified can only
hinder portability.

On page 24, the sub-paragraph: 

"... Similarly, an implementation is allowed to distinguish
invocations of a library across different phases or to treat an
invocation at any phase as an invocation at all phases. An
implementation is further allowed to start each expansion of a library
form by removing all library bindings above phase 0. Thus, a portable
library's meaning must not depend on whether the invocations are
distinguished or preserved across phases or library expansions."

should preferably be 

"... Similarly, an implementation is allowed to distinguish
invocations of a library across different phases or to treat an
invocation at any phase as an invocation at all phases. [no changes]

[changed position of this to avoid confusion:] Thus, a portable
library's meaning must not depend on whether the invocations are
distinguished or preserved across phases or library expansions.

An implementation is further [required] to start each expansion of a
library form by removing all library bindings above phase 0."

Again, as far as I am aware, all three existing reference
implementations do this, so again it should be no problem. Leaving it
unspecified can only hinder portability.

Furthermore, it may be helpful to point out that in the following:

"An implementation is allowed to distinguish visits of a library
across different phases or to treat a visit at any phase as a visit at
all phases"

the first kind of implementation may (or perhaps must?) use a separate
space of bindings for each phase, whereas in the second case the
bindings are shared between phases, but are only available to be used
in the phases stated in the "for ---" specifier, and that portable
libraries should not rely on either semantics. This can be a highly
confusing issue for the initiated and uninitiated alike, and a little
more explanation could be very useful.

RESPONSE:

The current specification reflects a compromise among different
possible models of libraries and syntax. In particular, in a system
without separate instances of libraries in different phases, and where
the phase shift of a variable or keyword is determined by context,
declared levels are meaningless. Therefore, the R6RS will continue to
allow implementations to ignore declared levels.

The following rationale expands on the rationale behind the R6RS
library specification. It elaborates the answer this formal comment,
as well as for comments #109, #110, #112, and #123.

----------------------------------------

The draft R6RS allows code to be organized into reusable libraries
that import and export both values and syntactic extensions.  A
precise specification of the library system remains elusive, partly
because different implementors still have different ideas about how
the library system should work. In particular, opinions vary on how
exactly libraries should be instantiated and initialized during the
expansion and execution of library bodies.

The different opinions are supported by two different reference
implementations of R6RS libraries: one by Van Tonder and one by
Ghuloum and Dybvig.  In addition, PLT Scheme implements a library
system that is similar to the Van Tonder variant of R6RS libraries, at
least in terms of the design questions where opinions vary.

Despite the differences in the reference implementations, it appears
that many programs will run the same in both variants of the library
system. The overlap appears to be large enough to support practical
portability between the variants.

Under the assumption that the overlap is useful, and given the lack of
consensus and relative lack of experience with the two prominent
variants of draft R6RS libraries, the R6RS specification of libraries
should be designed to admit both of the reference implementations.  As
a design process, this implementation-driven approach leaves something
to be desired, but it seems to be the surest way forward.

The draft R6RS specification of libraries already accommodates the two
existing designs, almost, but a few changes are necessary. The
following describes the three key differences of opinions in the two
implementation approaches, and it described the changes that are
planned to accommodate the differences.

Some Terminology
----------------

"Phase": an execution time, such as run-time or expand-time. The
notion of phase is inherently relative to some library; the "run time"
of one library may be the "expand time" of some other library that
imports the former for use by procedural macros.

"Phase shift": the execution time of a variable or keyword reference
relative to a library that is being expanded and parsed. For example,
when an identifier appears in an unquoted position on the right-hand
side of a `define-syntax' form, it is either parsed as a variable with
a phase shift of 1, because it access a variable at expand time
(relative to the enclosing library), or it is parsed as a keyword whose
use with a phase shift of 1, because the use is expanded at expand
time.

"Levels": potential phase shifts for an identifier relative to the
lexically enclosing library. An unparsed identifier has levels in its
source context; a parsed variable or keyword has a phase shift in its
use context.

Implementation Differences
--------------------------

The two implementation approaches differ on three related points:

 1. Whether instances of a library at different phases are the same
    or different.

    This is arguably the driving distinction. PLT Scheme and Van
    Tonder's implementation instantiate a library separately for each
    phase, and even for each individual compilation of a library. The
    motivation for separating instances is to maximize the similarly
    between compiling and executing libraries all in the same run-time
    system instance, versus compiling libraries in separate instances
    of the run-time system. The Ghuloum/Dybvig implementation
    instantiates a library once for all uses, on the grounds that
    libraries used in multiple phases generally do not (or should not)
    use externally visible state, so the overhead for separate
    instances is not justified.

 2. Whether bindings are introduced for identifiers at specific levels,
    so that some relationship is enforced between the binding levels of
    an identifier and uses the identifier at different phase shifts.

    In the existing implementation approaches, enforcing the
    connection goes with instantiating libraries separately for each
    phases (i.e. PLT Scheme and Van Tonder enforce the connection,
    Ghuloum/Dybvig does not). Whether this correlation is for
    technical reasons or a matter of taste is unclear, but separating
    phase instances enables a certain implementation technique for
    enforcing levels, and enforcing levels seems to make more sense
    when the meaning of an identifier is potentially different (in
    some sense) in different phases.  In contrast, when libraries are
    instantiated once for all phases, requiring the programmer to
    specify levels seems redundant; phase shifts can always be
    determined automatically.

 3. How library instantiations are triggered so that the library is
    initialized for use at various phases.

    When libraries are instantiated separately for separate phases and
    when binding levels are explicitly declared, tying instantiation
    to binding-level declarations ensures that certain "library not
    initialized at phase X" errors cannot happen. Thus, PLT Scheme and
    Van Tonder's implementation tie instantiate to import
    declarations. When phase shifts are inferred, then library
    dependencies can also be inferred for each phase, so
    Ghuloum/Dybvig determines instantiation dependencies based on uses
    of imported bindings, rather than level specifications on import.

Changes to R6RS
---------------

Besides improving the R6RS draft to clarify the difference between
phases, phase shifts, and levels, we plan to make two technical
changes:

 * Allow negative levels for import (i.e., negative integers in a
   `meta' form). This extension allows `identifier-syntax' to be
   implemented as a derived form in implementations that enforce
   levels.

 * Weaken and simplify the specification of invoking and visiting.
   The revised specification will simply guarantee that if a library
   in its macro-expanded form uses a variable binding with phase shift
   0, then before the library is invoked (at phase N, if phases have
   distinguished instances), the source library for the binding will
   be invoked (at phase N).
