Ticket #76 (defect)

Clean up make-transcoder to accept three symbol arguments
Status: new	Reported by:	John Cowan	Assigned to:	sperber
Priority:	minor	Milestone:	r6rs
Component:	i/o	Version:	5.91

The current design of make-transcoder (Section 15.3.3, pp. 86-87)
involves passing it up to three arguments:

1) The first argument specifies the encoding, and is an object of
   unknown type (OUT) which is either:

a) the result of calling one of the standard *-code procedures; or

b) obtained by an implementation-specific method. 

2) The second argument specifies the EOL style. It is either:

a) one of the symbols 'cr, 'lf, 'crlf, or 'ls; or 

b) an OUT returned by the standard macro eol-style when passed an
   identifier other than one of those four; or

c) an OUT returned by the standard procedure native-eol-style; or 

d) an OUT obtained by an implementation-specific method. 

3) The third argument specifies the error handling mode. It is either: 

a) one of the symbols 'ignore, 'raise, or 'replace; or 

b) an OUT returned by the standard macro error-handling-mode when
   passed an identifier other than one of those three; or

c) an OUT obtained by an implementation-specific method.

In addition, if the third argument is omitted, it is the same as
passing 'raise; if the second and third arguments are omitted, it is
the same as passing (native-eol-style) and 'raise respectively.

I can see absolutely no benefit to this diversity of interface
styles. I propose that make-transcoder take exactly three arguments
which must be symbols:

1) If the first argument is 'latin-1 or 'utf-8 or 'utf-16 or 'local,
   the transcoder will use the specified character sets. If it is a
   different symbol, the meaning is implementation-defined.

2) If the first argument is 'cr or 'lf or 'crlf or 'universal, the
   transcoder will use the specified EOL style, where 'universal means
   "accept any EOL style on input, produce the local EOL style on
   output". (For reference, the known EOL styles are CR, CR+LF, LF,
   NEL, CR+NEL, and LS, where NEL = U+0085 and LS = U+2028.) If it is
   a different symbol, the meaning is implementation-defined.

3) If the third argument is 'ignore or 'raise or 'replace, then the
   transcoder will take the appropriate action on encoding errors. If
   it is a different symbol, the meaning is implementation-defined.

