Formal comment #39 (enhancement)

Script-body differences
Name        : Andre van Tonder
Email       : andre at het.brown.edu
Type        : enhancement
Priority    : minor
Component   : Script/body semantics
Version     : 5.91
Pages       : 27
Dependencies: None

Summary:
--------

Difference between bodies and script bodies
seem like an unnecessary complication.

Description:
------------

The description of scripts gives a meaning to expressions
preceding definitions that may just as easily be applied
to other bodies.  The fact that it does not complicates
the draft.

If the same rules applied to both scripts and bodies, it
would be easier to convert one into the other during
incremental or interactive development.  Presumably this
would be a useful feature.

Also, the current state of affairs slightly complicates
implementation.  I currently use the same code for expanding
both scripts and bodies, except for a couple of statements
of the form

   (when (not script?) (syntax-violation ....))

which seem like a gratuitous complication.

Suggestion:
-----------

Perhaps treat scripts/bodies the same by either allowing or
disallowing interspersed expressions/definitions in both.


RESPONSE:

This suggestion will not be adopted, for the following reasons:

  * libraries generally represent reusable code, for which the labor
    involved in putting definitions before expressions
    is amortized over reuse 

  * some programs are throwaway code, for which the syntactic
    annoyance of putting definitions before expressions might
    represent some measurable fraction of the five minutes spent on
    writing the program

  * besides, libraries can be combined using import; the only way to
    combine programs is concatenation, which wouldn't
    create a program if definitions were required to precede expressions 

Historical note: mixing definitions with expressions has several
possible semantics, and has been confusing historically.  This feature
of programs specifies a single unambigous semantics that can be relied
on by portable programs.
