Formal comment #152 (defect)

Inappropriate number of values should be defined sensibly
Reported by: 	John Cowan
Version:	5.92

Report section 9.17, s.v. "values", says that passing an inappropriate
number of values to a continuation is undefined. I believe it ought to
be defined thus:

    If an expression supplies too many values to its continuation, the
    excess values are discarded. If it supplies too few values, the
    deficient values are set to the unspecified value.

In particular, this paves the way to eliminating "the unspecified
value" in favor of simply returning zero values.

RESPONSE:

This formal comment was withdrawn by the author, but the editors have
chosen to respond to make their rationale clear.

Variations of two different and fundamentally incompatible positions on
this issue exist, each with its own merits:

Position #1: Passing the wrong number of values to a continuation is
typically an error, one that implementations ideally detect and report.

Position #2: There is no such thing as returning the wrong number of
values to a continuation.  In particular, continuations not created by
begin or call-with-values should ignore all but the first value, and
treat zero values as one unspecified value.

R5.92RS allows an implementation to take either position, with certain
constraints.  First, continuations created by begin accept any number of
values.  Second, continuations created by call-with-values effectively
accept a given number of values only if the consumer accepts that number
of values.  Third, continuations created by let-values and let*-values
effectively accept a given number of values only if their formals "match"
in a way analogous to a call-with-values consumer.

For those who take Position 1, a palatable way of looking at the first
constraint is that continuations created by begin are treated as if
created by an implicit call-with-values with a consumer that accepts and
ignores any number of arguments.

For those who take Position 2, a palatable way of looking at the second
constraint is that continuations created by call-with-values accept any
number of values, apply the consumer to those values, and let apply and
the procedure sort out whether an argument-count mismatch has occurred.  A
palatable way of looking at the third constraint is to view let-values and
let*-values in terms of their expansions into call-with-values calls.

The formal comment proposes to switch entirely to Position 2, but we do
not believe sufficient support exists in the community to disallow either
Position 1 or Position 2.  So we feel implementations should be given
enough latitude to take either position.

The formal comment actually proposes to take Position 2 an additional step
further, requiring that all continuations ignore extra values and default
missing values to an unspecified value.  This behavior is problematic,
however, when rest interfaces are used by a call-with-values consumer,
let-values, or let*-values, or when certain case-lambda interfaces are
used by a call-with-values consumer.

Therefore, we have decided to retain the R5.92RS specification allowing
either Position 1 or Position 2 with the constraints described above.

On the other hand, we agree that it is cleaner for set!, vector-set!, and
other effect-only operators to pass zero values to their continuations. 
This would cause backward compatibility problems, however, for programs
that expect a single (unspecified) return value.

Because we believe that the benefit may or may not outweigh the
backward-compatibility cost, the next version of the report will allow
implementations the freedom to determine the number of values returned by
such operators.  That is, such operators will be allowed to pass any
number of unspecified values (including zero or one) to their
continuations.  Programmers will be encouraged to avoid writing code that
depends on the number of values passed by such operators, but
implementations will be able to support backward compatibility if desired.

Along with this change, the distinguished "unspecified value" will be
dropped as well.
