Ticket #67 (enhancement)

The definition of flonum is in the wrong place
Status: new
Reported by:	Aubrey Jaffer
Assigned to:	will
Priority:	major
Component:	arithmetic
Version:	5.91
Keywords:	
Cc:	

The definition of flonums should be moved out of the "Rationale" on
page 39:

  The flonums are a subset of the inexact reals, but may be a proper
  subset.

and put on Page 100, in section "16.4. Flonums".

The phrase "but may be a proper subset" adds nothing to the
description and should be removed.  To make it compatible with the
earlier proposal "NaN is not a real number", the paragraph should be
reworded:

  The flonums are a subset of the inexact reals and NaNs.

Near the bottom of page 39, the lines:

  (finite? x)					procedure
  (infinite? x)					procedure
  (nan? x)					procedure

should be changed to:

  (finite? z)					procedure
  (infinite? z)					procedure
  (nan? z)					procedure

The text after this (page 40) states:

  ..., finite? tests if it is not an infinity and not a NaN,
  infinite? tests if it is an infinity, nan? tests if it is a NaN.

This leaves in question whether (infinite? +nan.0).  Changing the text
thus eliminates the unintended interpretation:

  ..., finite? tests if it is not an infinity and not a NaN,
  infinite? tests if it is an infinity or NaN, nan? tests if it is a
  NaN.

DRAFT RESPONSE

In the draft R6RS, flonums are defined on page 9, in the
last paragraph of section 2.1.  They are referenced on
page 15 in the last two paragraphs of section 3.2.7, in
the two rationales for the real->flonum procedure on page
39 in section 9.10.2, and throughout section 16.4.

The specification of real->flonum should be strengthened
to something like this:

    Returns the best flonum approximation to x.

In the first rationale for real->flonum, the reminder that
not all inexact reals are flonums is the core fact of the
rationale.  Whether that reminder would still be necessary
with the strengthened specification is an editorial decision.
If the reminder remains necessary, it could be phrased like
this:

    Not all reals are inexact, and some inexact reals may
    not be flonums.

The exact phrasing is an editorial decision.

The rest of Ticket #67 describes several changes that would
be required if the main proposal of Ticket #11 were adopted.
Our response to Ticket #11 explains why we believe that
proposal should not be adopted.

Ticket #67 proposes a semantics for nan? that would be
incompatible with IEEE-754 and IEEE-754R, because an IEEE
NaN is not an IEEE infinity.  This proposal was not adopted.

The editors considered expanding the domains of the finite?,
infinite?, and nan? procedures to include all numbers, or
perhaps even all objects, but decided against these changes.
Expanding nan? to complex numbers would involve at least some
arbitrariness; not expanding its domain while expanding the
domains of the other two would introduce an irregularity into
the domains of these three procedures, which are likely to be
used together; it is easier for programmers who wish to use
these procedures with complex numbers to express their intent
in terms of the real-only versions than it would be for the
editors to guess their intent.
