Ticket #60 (defect)

Declarations break lexical scoping
Status: new
Reported by:	Andre van Tonder
Assigned to:	sperber
Priority:	major
Component:	other
Version:	5.91
Keywords:	
Cc:	

Component : Bodies and sequences (9.4) and Expansion process (8) 

Pages : 28, 29 and 30 

Summary

Expansion process as currently described violates lexical scoping for
bodies with "declare" forms.

Description

Consider 

Example 1: 
   (let ()
     (declare safe)
     (define declare 1))

Example 2: 
   (let ()
     (declare safe)
     (define safe 1))

According to the algorithm in the first paragraph of p.28, it appears
that the first line in both examples should be accepted as a
declaration. This is in conflict with lexical scoping according to the
second paragraph of p.30, which says that "the region of the binding
is the entire <body>"

Suggestion

I see two options: 
Option 1:

Example 1 (but not example 2) can be fixed by changing the line on p 28: 

"To detect this error, the expander records the identifying keyword
for each macro use, define-syntax form, define form, begin form,
let-syntax form, and letrec-syntax form it encounters while processing
the definitions ..."

--> 

"To detect this error, the expander records the identifying keyword for each macro use, [[declare form]], define-syntax form, define form, begin form, let-syntax form, and letrec-syntax form it encounters while processing the [[declarations and]] definitions ..." 

Example 2 could be "fixed" by requiring declarations' <declare spec>s
to be expanded after all definitions have been discovered, along with
right hand sides and expressions. This has a problem:

The problem with this second part of the fix is that by the time all
definitions have been discovered, some expressions (all of them in
case of a script, and at least the first one in case of other bodies)
have already been partially expanded. Since declarations presumably
might be intended to affect the result of expanding expressions (e.g.,
by expanding to safe or unsafe primitives), this might break the
declarations.

Option 2:

Instead of the scope of a definition being the whole <body>, the scope
could be defined to be just the

<definition>...<sequence>... 

part of the body (for this to be consistent also with the expansion
process for scripts, I think one would also have to require
declarations to precede definitions in scripts).

DRAFT RESPONSE

Option 2 is the simplest way to repair the problem.

The freedom to place declarations anywhere within a script
should be withdrawn.  Declarations, if present, should
precede all definitions.

The scope of definitions should exclude any declarations
that precede the definitions.
