Ticket #124 (enhancement)

Please give us file-exists? and delete-file
Status: new	Reported by:	William D Clinger	Assigned to:	sperber
Priority:	minor	Milestone:	r6rs
Component:	i/o	Version:	5.91

Programs often need to determine whether a file exists, and programs
also need to clean up after themselves by deleting files.

The draft R6RS does not provide any way to delete a file.

The draft R6RS provides facilities that may be adequate for
determining whether a file exists: the program would establish an
exception handler for &i/o-file-exists-not conditions, try to open the
file for input, and conclude that the file exists if and only no
exception is raised. That technique is inconvenient, might be
inefficient, and might be viewed as misuse of the exception system,
whose stated purpose is to deal with exceptional situations; when
searching several paths for an optional input or configuration file,
the existence of that file is more exceptional than its non-existence.

Current practice: 

Of ten implementations surveyed, nine (Bigloo, Chicken, Gambit, Kawa,
Larceny, MIT Scheme, MzScheme?, Petite Chez, and scm) supply
file-exists? and delete-file as part of their default runtime. Only
one (Scheme 48) does not.

A grep of Larceny's code base found more than a hundred uses of
file-exists?, and more than a hundred uses of delete-file. A
comparable number of uses were found in Gambit's code base.

Related issues: 

Programs also need to determine whether a directory exists, and to
iterate through the files that are contained within a directory. I do
not know whether these features are as ready for standardization as
file-exists? and delete-file.

RESPONSE:

[No response yet. Either yes or no.]

Issues:

As to the "Related issues", standardization of procedures that return
or pass to another procedure the name of a file is more difficult than
standardization of `file-exists?' and `delete-file', because strings
are not sufficient to represent file names on some platforms, such as
Unix and Windows.
