Ticket #123 (defect)

Replacing the import's "for" syntax with implicit phasing
Status: new	Reported by:	Abdulaziz Ghuloum	Assigned to:	mflatt
Priority:	critical	Milestone:	r6rs
Component:	libraries	Version:	5.91

One sentence summary: The "for" syntax should be removed from the
  "import" syntax and that library phasing be implicit.


Summary:

Explicit specification of phases in the library import form puts an
unnecessary burden on the programmer and limits the expressiveness of
the
library mechanism.  In addition, it leads to unnecessary library visits
and invocations.  The library mechanism would thus be easier to use,
more
expressive, and more efficient if phasing is implicit.  An
implementation
capable of verifying that identifiers are used out of phase (as are the
current reference implementations) is equally capable of inferring when
the imported libraries must be visited and invoked.  A potential
downside
might be that the user does not have complete control over when any
externally visible side effects of visiting a library occur.  Such side
effects are already problematic, however, with the existing
specification,
which allows libraries to be visited and/or invoked once or multiple
times
by an implementation.  Furthermore, I believe that it is bad programming
practice for a library to have externally visible side effects at visit
or invocation time.

I recommend, therefore, that the "for" syntax be removed from the
"import" syntax and that library phasing be implicit.



* Introduction:

The import form of R6RS libraries specifies the following: (1) The
sets of libraries to be imported, (2) Modifications on the sets
including exclusion, renaming, and adding prefixes, and (3) the
phase or phases in which the library is made available.  The import
phase specifies *when* information about a library is made available
and consequently *where* the imported transformers and bindings can
appear within the library.  The import phase is one of:

- run: for bindings appearing in run-time code

- expand: for bindings appearing in the bodies of transformers
    (e.g. the right-hand-sides of transformer bindings)

- (meta 2) for bindings appearing in the bodies of transformers
    that appear within bodies of transformers, and so on.

Section 6.2 of R5.91RS states that ``an exception may be raised,
however, if a binding is used out of its declared phase(s)''.
Consequently, users wishing to write portable libraries must specify
the precise set of required import phases.  From my experience in
implementing the phased model of R6RS libraries, I realized three
key difficulties with precise phase specification:

- The import phases fail to capture the intention of the user of
   when libraries must be visited and invoked.

- The import phases restrict the set of macros that one
   wishes to write.  Some useful and semantically valid macros are
   unexpressible in the phased model of R6RS libraries.

- The process of manual derivation of the import phases for a
   library that makes good use of Scheme's macros is error-prone,
   time-consuming and counter-productive.

The rest of this document is divided into two parts: part 1 is an
elaboration on the key difficulties summarized above, and part 2
describes a proposal for an alternative model in which the
implementation, rather than the user, takes the responsibility of
deriving the required phases.


* Difficulties with the Phased Model

** The phased model fails to capture the users' intentions

This section is an extended example of some libraries that one may
wish to write.  Let's start off with a simple library that defines a
defmacro-like transformer: (identifiers are numbers so that I can
reference them)

(library defsyntax
   (export defsyntax)
   (import (for r6rs ???))
   (define-syntax#0 defsyntax
     (syntax-rules#1 ()
       [(_ (name args ...) body)
        (define-syntax#2 name
          (syntax-rules#3 ()
            [(_ args ...) body]))])))

For which phases should the four referenced identifiers be imported?

define-syntax#0 should be imported for run and syntax-rules#2 should
be imported for expand since define-syntax#0 appears in level-0 and
syntax-rules#1 appears in level-1 (right-hand-side of a
transformer).

define-syntax#2 should also be imported for run and syntax-rules#3
should be imported for expand since they will appear in level-0 and
level-1 code (respectively) in the importing library.

 From the requirements of the library and its importer, we know that
the r6rs library must be imported for run and expand.

(library defsyntax
   (export defsyntax)
   (import (for r6rs run expand))
   (define-syntax defsyntax
     (syntax-rules ()
       [(_ (name args ...) body)
        (define-syntax name
          (syntax-rules ()
            [(_ args ...) body]))])))

Now that we have defsyntax, we can use it in another library:

(library definlined
   (export definlined)
   (import (for defsyntax ???))
   (defsyntax#0 (definlined name value)
     (defsyntax#1 (name) value)))

Spend a minute or two to try to puzzle out the import phases for
defsyntax.

Using definlined is now straightforward:

(library C
   (export c)
   (import (for definlined run))
   (definlined c 5))

(library D
   (export)
   (import r6rs C)
   (display (c)))

In order to compile D, we first:
   visit C at phase 0, causing
     visit definlined at phase 0, causing
       visit defsyntax at phase 0, causing
         visit r6rs at phase 0 and
         visit and invoke r6rs at phase 1
       visit and invoke defsyntax at phase 1, causing
         visit and invoke r6rs at phase 1 and
         visit and invoke r6rs at phase 2

Most of this avalanche of library visits and invocations is unnecessary
since definlined and defsyntax are only needed when C is compiled, not
when it is visited.

(library C
   (export c)
   (import (for r6rs run expand))
   (define-syntax c
     (syntax-rules ()
       [(_) 5])))

In short, C imported definlined for its own local expansion.  Once C
was expanded and compiled, no more references to definlined or
defsyntax exist in the transformer code, yet every time C is imported
by another library, definlined and defsyntax are visited and invoked
needlessly and possibly many times.  We had no way of stating that
definlined is needed only for expanding the body of the library and
will never be needed from that point forward.

Back to the library D:

(library D
   (export)
   (import r6rs C)
   (display (c)))

Once D is expanded, it will look as if it were written as:

(library D
   (export)
   (display 5))

The sad part is that whenever D is imported, the whole avalanche of
visits and invocations is done again despite the fact that D exports
nothing and uses nothing from the libraries C, definlined, and
defsyntax!


** Macro helpers are unexpressible

Suppose one wishes to define a set of assertion macros to be defined as
follows:

(assert-integer expr)
=>
(let ([t expr])
   (if (integer? t) t (error ---)))

Since we might want to define many assertion macros such as
assert-boolean, assert-string, ..., we can define a library that
abstracts away the details of making a transformer as follows:

(library errors
   (export report-error)
   (import r6rs)
   (define report-error ---))

(library assertion-maker
   (export assertion-transformer)
   (import r6rs (for report-error ???))
   (define-syntax assertion-transformer
     (syntax-rules ()
       [(_ pred)
        (syntax-rules ()
          [(_ val)
           (let ([t val])
             (if (pred t)
                 t
                 (report-error ---)))])])))

Next, we can define our set of assertion macros using the
assertion-transformer macro:

(library canned-assertions
   (export assert-integer assert-boolean assert-string)
   (import r6rs (for assertion-maker expand))
   (define-syntax assert-integer
     (assertion-transformer integer?))
   (define-syntax assert-boolean
     (assertion-transformer boolean?))
   (define-syntax assert-string
     (assertion-transformer string?)))

First, the import of assertion-maker-phases in canned-assertions
must be "for expand" since the call to assertion-transformer appears on
the right-hand-side of a transformer definition.

Now suppose a library L imports canned-assertions "for run".  Invoking
L at phase 0 causes invoking canned-assertions at phase 0 which does
NOT cause assertion-maker to be invoked (it was imported for expand)
and consequently report-error is not invoked at runtime.

The two existing reference implementations of R6RS libraries, one by
Ghuloum and Dybvig and the other by van Tonder, exhibit this problem and
use two different approaches for dealing with the problem.  The two
techniques are cited here as evidence only; I'm not a fan of either
technique.

The Ghuloum/Dybvig implementation extends the R6RS libraries by
including
meta definitions and meta macro definitions.  In essense, meta appearing
in phase N cause its body to be defined in phase N+1.  In the previous
example, canned-assertions imports report-error for run and meta-defines
assertion-maker for expand.  Consequently, when canned-assertions
imports
assertion-maker for run, everything works as we want.

The van Tonder implementation extends the R6RS libraries by including
negative meta levels.  With this approach, report-error is imported
by assertion-maker for (meta -1) which cancels out with the (meta 1)
used for importing assertion-maker making report-error effectively a
phase-0 import.  Negative meta levels are similar to PLT Scheme's
require-for-template form.

Neither solution is ideal since each adds more complexity to a library
semantics that is already needlessly complex.


** Manual derivation of import phases is complex

Based on my personal experience in implementing and testing phased
libraries, I found the task of deriving the correct import phases for
any
library that makes good use of Scheme macros extremely complex,
error-prone, and time-consuming.  Despite my intimate understanding of
the implementation, I often found myself guessing at the proper phase
specifications.  Overall, I found the activity of deriving the
correct import phases to be counter-productive, since I spent more time
determining phases than in the task of writing the rest of the library.
I found it frustrating as well whenever I discovered that a sufficient
set
of phase declarations did not exist or when I discovered that the
necessary set of declarations caused unnecessary library visits and
invocations.

This experience led me to conclude that the burden for determining when
libraries should be visited and invoked should be placed on the
implementation, not the user, in order to eliminate guess work,
busy work, and frustration on the part of the user while simultaneously
increasing both the expressiveness and efficiency of the library
mechanism.  It turns out that an implementation that detects phase
errors can easily be converted into one that infers when libraries
must be visited and invoked, and I have developed such an implementation
and found it to be much more pleasant to use.

* Formal recommendation:

I recommend that phase specifiers be dropped completely from the
library's
import form.  The replacement for explicit phase specification is an
implicit phase derivation in which the macro expander automatically
derives the phases in which identifiers are used.  The macro expander,
knowing exactly from which library identifiers were imported, and
knowing
exactly the types of the imported identifiers (i.e.  syntacic forms,
variables, etc.) can handle visiting and invoking these libraries on
demand in the appropriate phases (compiling a library, importing a macro
definition, importing a variable reference, etc.).

A reference implementation will be made available within the next few
days.

DRAFT RESPONSE

[Note: essentially the same text is in #110.]

As reflected in the discussion on the r6rs-discuss mailing list,
opinions vary about the merits of declared levels. Consensus will have
to be reached through experience with different models. Meanwhile,
R6RS will maintain a compromise position that allows both explicit,
enfored levels and implicit phasing (i.e., where `for' is effectively
ignored).
