Ticket #63 (enhancement)

Blame assignment for contract violations
Status: new
Reported by:	Robby Findler
Assigned to:	sperber
Priority:	minor
Component:	other
Version:	5.91
Keywords:	
Cc:	

r6rs component: errors and violations (section 9.17) 

Description

The phrase "contract violation" typically (in English usage and in my
research) refers to some kind of agreement between two (or more)
parties where on party has violated the argument. In my work on
contracts, the parties to the contracts are typically constructs that
play a role in organizing a program, such as modules or
components. Also, my research is predicated on the idea that proper
blame assignment in these situations is important in order to narrow
down the search for the bug in the program.

The usage in the R6 report does not seem consistent with this take,
but I think it can be made to be so, in at least one of two ways.

Option One: to write a little bit of explanation in the text in section 
9.17 that the contract is between the implementation of the report and
the program itself and implicitly the blame is always being assigned
to the program (since the implementation of the report is assumed to
be correct). In that case, all of the other arguments to
contract-violation are essentially bonus information to help track
down why the violation occurred (in particular the "who" is not "who
got blamed").

Option Two: integrate the contract violation mechanism with the
library

form, and report the library whose use of the primitive failed. For
example, if my program has two libraries, and one of them contains
(letrec ((x x)) 1), then the contract violation would name the
appropriate library (similarly for other contract violations).

Option two is likely to be too expensive (at least I don't see how to
implement it efficiently, but hopefully I'm missing a trick
somewhere), but it does have the additional benefit that the same
mechanism can be used to build a contract library that would mediate
inter-library contracts, not just the contracts between the library
and the language implementation.

RESPONSE:

The &contract condition type will be renamed to &assertion,
`contract-violation?' will be renamed to `assertion-violation?', and
`contract-violation' will be renamed to `assertion-violation'.

These names are the result of a private e-mail discussion between
Robby Findler and Mike Sperber; they are acceptable to Robby.

