Formal comment #58 (enhancement)

only 'big' and 'little' as endiannness may not be enough
Reported by:	Shiro Kawai

Component:	other
Version:	5.91

On page 60, it reads: "(endian big) and (endian little) evaluate to
the symbols big and little, respectively. These symbols represent an
endianness, and whenever one of the procedures operating on bytes
objects accepts an endianness as an argument, that argument must be
one of these symbols"

To my knowledge, some ARM processors stores IEEE double float value in
neither big-endian nor little-endian format (to be specific, two 32bit
words are stored in big-endian, but within each 32bit word bytes are
stored in little-endian).

Limiting endianness to 'big' and 'little' forces implementations on
these processors to perform some sort of conversion for each
bytes-ieee-double-native-ref/bytes-ieee-double-native-set!, preventing
them from efficient access to the processors' truly native binary
data.

Can't implementations be allowed to extend these procedures so that it
can accept implementation-specific endianness symbols rather than big
or little?

A drawback could be that if we allow such an extension,
(native-endianness) may return a symbol which is neither big nor
little, causes potential portability problem if such symbol is written
in the data. A potential solution can be to distinguish "preferred
endianness", which indicates which of pure big or pure little endian
the architecture prefers, from "native endianness", which can be
neither big or little.

If we don't want this additional complexity in the spec, another
potential resolution is simply to avoid "native" in the procedure
names. Then implementations can provide truly "native" procedures as
their extension. native-endianness can be preferred-endianness, but I
don't have a good word for byte-*-native-{ref|set!} yet.

RESPONSE:

In the next draft, the following changes will be made:

- Implementations are allowed to extend the set of endianness symbols.

- `native-endianness' may return one of the implementation-specific
  symbols.

- The *-native-* procedures may adopt the endianness described by one
  of the implementation-specific symbols.
