Ticket #78 (enhancement)
Rationalize the various iteration procedures
Status: new	Reported by:	Michael Lenaghan	Assigned to:	anton
Priority:	major	Milestone:	r6rs
Component:	other	Version:	5.91
Keywords:		Cc:	

Component: Hash Tables, Lists, Vectors 

Section: 

9.16 Vectors (pg 47); 12 List Utilities (pg 64); 18.2 Hash Table
Procedures (pg 117); 23.3.2 List Utilities (pg 125)

Description

R6RS specifies several list iteration procedures, one hash table
iteration procedure, and no vector iteration procedures.

The parameter list for list folding is somewhat different than that
for hash table folding; the init parameter is in a different spot. (If
a fold were offered for vectors the init would be in the same spot as
the list fold utilities since a vector fold could plausibly accept
more than one vector, so hash tables should follow the list model.)

        (fold-left kons nil list1 list2 . . . listn)
        (fold-right kons nil list1 list2 . . . listn)

        (hash-table-fold proc hash-table init)

Why is folding the only iteration offered for hash tables? Chez Scheme
and PLT Scheme both offer hash table map and "each" procedures. Though
they could both be written in terms of hash-table-fold, R6RS follows a
funny line, dramatically expanding the number of list utilities while
at the same time keeping a minimal set of operations for other
types--more or less. For example, R6RS does provide hash-table-keys
and hash-table-values, which (as shown in the spec) could also be
written in terms of hash-table-fold but are nevertheless provided.

Why do folds not allow for premature termination? Oleg argues at
http://okmij.org/ftp/Computation/Continuations.html#enumerator-stream
that the most general purpose iterator is a left fold that allows for
premature termination. None of the fold procedures in R6RS allow for
premature termination without the use of exceptions or
continuations. Imagine, for example, writing a procedure to find a
value (rather than a key) in a hash table; with R6RS the only option
is hash-table-fold, and the only way to prematurely exit the fold is
to escape the procedure.

Why is no iteration of any kind offered for vectors? Again, while R6RS
is dramatically expanding the list utilities it is leaving a rather
minimal set for nearly all other types. Vectors would benefit from
pre-defined iterators, and some compilers would undoubtedly be able to
optimize such iterators.

Recommendations: 

Decide whether the R6RS philosophy is to provide the minimal set of
procedures, or a reasonable set.

If the philosophy is to provide a minimal set, arguably left fold
*with premature termination* is more primitive (and more useful) than
the fold procedures provided.

If the philosophy is to provide a reasonable set, some thought should
be given to what that set should be, and that set should be
implemented for all types where it makes sense. A reasonable set might
be fold with premature termination, fold without premature termination
(for convenience), map, and for-each.

In any event, parameter lists for similar iterators of different types
shouldn't differ needlessly.


RESPONSE:

Regarding the R6RS philosophy, the guiding principles listed in the 
R6RS Status Report of June 21 2006 are relevant, particularly the
following excerpts:

* Provide "a small number of generally useful syntactic forms and 
  procedures".

* Support the development of "substantial programs and libraries,
  e.g. SRFI implementations, that run without modification 
  in a variety of Scheme implementations".

* "Include building blocks that allow a wide variety of libraries 
  to be written ..."

In the case of iteration procedures, the emphasis is not on trying 
to preempt the development of libraries dealing with basic data 
types, but rather to support the development of portable libraries 
by providing procedures which might otherwise be difficult to 
implement portably and/or efficiently.

To this end, the following changes will be made in the next draft:

* vector-for-each and vector-map procedures will be added.  They 
  will have the same interface as for-each and map, except that 
  they will take vectors instead of lists, and vector-map will 
  return a vector.

* The hash-table-fold procedure will be dropped.
  Rationale: providing a common iteration interface across data 
  types is beyond the scope of R6RS.  The data types in question 
  have different characteristics, and this is particularly apparent
  when specifying procedures designed to be used as building blocks.

* A hash-table-entries procedure will be added, which returns two 
  values: a vector of the keys and a vector of the corresponding 
  values.  Rationale: this procedure can be implemented and used 
  efficiently, making it useful as a building block for other 
  procedures.

* Consistent with hash-table-entries, the hash-table-keys procedure 
  will be changed to return a vector of keys, rather than a list.
  In the absence of hash-table-fold, hash-table-keys is particularly 
  useful for supporting mutating traversals of a hash table.

* The hash-table-values procedures will be dropped.

* Regarding the comment's point about premature termination, call/cc 
  can be used for that purpose.
