Formal comment #6 (enhancement)

Applicable record instances
Reported by:	Pascal Costanza
Priority:	minor
Component:	records
Version:	5.91

Full description of the issue:

This is a proposal to add a notion of "applicable record instances" to
R6RS Scheme. An applicable record instance is a record instance that
has a distinct "applicable" field that is supposed to contain a
procedure. Such an applicable instance can be used as the value in the
first position of an expression, or as the first parameter to apply,
and when such an expression is evaluated this will effectively call
the procedure stored in the distinct "applicable" field of the record
instance (or raise an appropriate exception if that field doesn't
contain a procedure). Rationale:

Applicable record instances are useful when a program needs to
associate procedures with data. They enable storing both procedures
and data directly in the same instances rather than linking them via
hash tables, association lists, etc., or alternatively making it
inconvenient to call such procedures.

Such applicable record instances are especially useful to build a more
full-fledged object system on top. For example, the Common Lisp Object
System, or better its concept of generic functions, is essentially
built in terms of such applicable instances, there called "funcallable
instances" [1]. The downside of a lack of applicable instances can for
example be observed in the (Scheme-based) implementation of Tiny
CLOS. The source code of Tiny CLOS has to jump through a few
unpleasent hoops in order to get the same effect [2].

See also [3] for another object system for Scheme with a different
flavor based on T that also requires a notion of applicable record
instance, there simply called instances (cf. Sections 3.1 and 3.2 in
that paper).

Note that there is no need that the procedure stored in the distinct
field of an applicable record instance has a special reference to its
enclosing instance (for example, like a self/this/current reference in
OOP languages). It's sufficient that such a procedure closes over the
respective record instance.

I currently see two ways how such applicable record instances can be
added to R6RS Scheme. One way would be to add a declaration for
fields, similar to the mutable / immutable declarations, roughly like
this:

(define-record-type some-record
  (fields (mutable applicable proc)))

or: 

(define-record-type some-record
  (fields (mutable-apply proc)))

A disadvantage of such a design would be a requirement to handle
record types inheriting from each other that declare more than one
applicable field.

Alternatively, a predefined record type could be added that
predeclares an applicable field which other record types can be
derived from. A disadvantage here would be that it has to be decided
whether such a field is mutable or not (which in the general case it
should be).

There are probably better alternatives. 

Pascal 

[1] http://www.lisp.org/mop/concepts.html#funcallable-instances 
[2] http://community.schemewiki.org/?tiny-clos 
[3] Norman Adams and Jonathan Rees, Object-Oriented Programming in Scheme


RESPONSE:

This proposal may have semantic and/or implementation consequences that
should be investigated before standardization.  We prefer to leave it out
of R6RS, and we encourage instead that the mechanism be investigated via
the SRFI process and possibly considered for a future report.
