Formal comment #12 (enhancement)

R6RS library syntax should include a standard format for importing SRFI libraries
Reported by:	Dave Herman

Component:	libraries
Version:	5.91
Keywords:	srfi

RATIONALE

In the interest of portability, programmers should be able to rely on
a common format for importing SRFI's from any implementations that
support them. 

SYNTAX

A <SRFI library reference> is a <library reference> distinguished by
its first symbol, which is always 'srfi.

A <SRFI library reference> must have the following form: 
  (srfi <SRFI number>)

A <SRFI number> must be an exact positive integer. 
MEANING

R6RS implementations may support any of the SRFI's at
http://srfi.schemers.org, but are not required to support all or
indeed any of them. An R6RS implementation that supports SRFI n must
provide that SRFI for import via the library reference

    (srfi n)

DISCUSSION AND ALTERNATIVES

Required SRFI implementations

An R6RS implementation that does not provide an imported SRFI will
fail fast, so not requiring all SRFI's to be implemented doesn't
appear too problematic. Besides, there are many rejected and obsolete
SRFI's, so requiring them all would be pretty silly

Multiple SRFI implementations

An R6RS import specifies a concrete implementation, not an abstract
interface that might have multiple implementations. Nevertheless, for
SRFI's, it's tempting to allow clients to choose specific
implementations of SRFI's with graceful degradation to standard
implementations. For example, R6RS implementations FooScheme and
BarScheme might both use the standard reference implementation of SRFI
13 as the default library, but BarScheme might support an alternative
implementation that is more efficient for certain usage patterns. The
client might wish to specify:

    (import (srfi 13 (BarScheme fast-on-every-third-wednesday)))

This way FooScheme would be free to use the standard implementation,
but BarScheme could use the special implementation.

I don't find this terribly compelling, and it seems counter to the
meaning of R6RS libraries. Furthermore, coordinating globally unique
identifiers for Scheme implementations seems like a can of worms. Note
also that the above example is not valid <library reference> syntax
according to draft 5.91 of R6RS. I doubt it's possible to specify such
a mechanism without changing the syntax of <library
reference>. Standard mnemonics for SRFI's

It would be convenient for programmers to be able to import SRFI's by
symbolic mnemonic instead of index, e.g.:

    (import (srfi list)    ;; same as (srfi 1)
            (srfi string)) ;; same as (srfi 13)

As far as I know, there is no current registry for such mnemonics, so
this would probably require a change to the SRFI process.

SRFI imports via planet

An alternative to this proposal would be to provide SRFI's via a
cross-implementation public repository, similar to PLaneT [1]. I
really hope such a thing comes to be, but it seems reasonable to allow
implementations to build more efficient native implementations of
SRFI's, and to provide a standardized, cross-implementation way that
Scheme programs import SRFI's.

[1] Matthews, Component Deployment with PLaneT: You Want it
Where?. Scheme Workshop 2006.

RESPONSE:

Standard library names for SRFIs will certainly encourage portability,
and the proposed convention certainly appropriate. However, it seems
better to leave the specification of the names to the SRFI process,
rather than build it into R6RS.
