Ticket #71 (defect)

String operations need more complete specification
Status: new	Reported by:	William D Clinger	Assigned to:	mflatt
Priority:	minor	Milestone:	r6rs
Component:	unicode	Version:	5.91

Section 10.2 describes eight procedures that return strings as
results, but does not say whether those results should be newly
allocated strings. When the specified result is string=? to the
argument, the argument could be returned instead of a copy.

This would be an important optimization for normalization procedures,
since all strings of ASCII characters normalize to themselves. It
would be less important, but worthwhile, for the four case-conversion
procedures.

Inasmuch as section 9.15 consistently requires a newly allocated
string to be returned, I wonder whether the absence of such
requirements in section 10.2 was deliberate or an oversight.

The last paragraph of Section 4.6 is relevant for some but not all
implementations. In "such systems", the strings returned by the case
conversion and normalization procedures are mutable, which would limit
opportunities for the optimization tacitly invited by section
10.2. The meaning of the word "such" is unclear, however. (That lack
of clarity was introduced by the R5RS; the corresponding paragraph of
the R4RS was clearer, though not perfectly clear, and was
implementation-independent.)

I suspect that the twelfth example in section 10.2 contains an
error. Unicode Standard Annex # 21 (Case Mappings) implies that both
of the sigmas in the result should be final sigmas [1].

I recommend that the example be corrected, that the notion of an
immutable object be defined as in the R4RS, but more clearly, that the
eight case conversion and normalization procedures in section 10.2 be
allowed to return their argument when that makes sense, even when
their argument is immutable, and that this be mentioned explicitly in
their specifications.

Will 

[1] http://unicode.org/reports/tr21/tr21-5.html

RESPONSE:

The absence of specification in 10.2 was indeed an oversight. A
revised draft of R6RS will specify that the case-conversion and
normalization procedures may return their argument (but are not
required to do so) when the result is the same character sequence as
the argument.

The twelfth example in 10.2 is as intended.
